[WHOOSHING NOISE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SUE MORTER: We often hear
the term muscle memory.
Well, it turns out that it's
not only our muscles that store
memories but our entire body--
muscles, organs, blood
vessels, and more.
And when we experience
traumatic events,
our bodies hold onto and
suppress these experiences
in ways that often result
in pain and disease.
Jonathan Tripodi, a
physical therapist,
developed a body work program
called Body Memory Recall,
which facilitates the body's
innate ability to release
and heal old wounds.
BMR, as it's known, has
helped countless people
to come out of survival mode
and enter a self-healing state,
restoring them to
renewed health, vitality,
and fulfillment.
Welcome, Jonathan.
>>JONATHAN TRIPODI: Thank you.
>>SUE: It's so great
to have you here.
Can you just tell us
a little bit about,
what is body memory
to begin with?
>>TRIPODI: Yeah.
Concisely, I would say body
memory is those experiences
from our past that
we experienced
as overwhelming or painful
that we suppressed as a way
to survive.
The suppression is not only
in the mind but in the body.
>>SUE: And when did you first
learn about body memory?
>>TRIPODI: I'd just got out
of physical therapy school,
and I attended a
myofascial release workshop
by John Barnes.
And it was during that
workshop, through the practice
of techniques, that I
accessed some body memory.
>>SUE: And how does a
person develop body memory?
>>TRIPODI: Just
being human, we have
experiences that are
overwhelming and painful
throughout our life.
The ones that occurred in our
childhood we often forget.
But the ones that we
experience in adulthood
are the ones we remember.
But all these experiences
we cope with and survive
in a very automated way.
We don't think about it.
We just survive it.
And by surviving
it, we suppress it.
And that's how we
begin to accumulate
body memory over a lifetime.
>>SUE: And so how does
somebody know if they
have this happening with them?
What are the symptoms that
would reveal, giving someone
the notion that maybe
something's being held
in my system here that's keeping
me from moving forward in life?
>>TRIPODI: Pain is the
most obvious symptom.
When we suppress memory, memory
actually consists of energy.
So when energy isn't
flowing through the body,
it's creating tension.
And tension over time creates
inflammation and pain.
So any place in your body that
is painful and chronically
painful is a good
sign that there's
a body memory source behind it.
There's also emotional sources,
like anxiety and depression,
certainly digestive issues,
breathing problems, circulatory
or neurological conditions.
Because body memory
is cellular, it
can affect every aspect of our
anatomy and creates symptoms.
>>SUE: So we go through
a traumatic experience.
Our body has a memory
of that experience
and reacts in some way.
If it gets stuck in that
pattern of reaction,
then we're stuck right there
as a memory pattern running us.
Is this basically
what you're saying?
>>TRIPODI: You're
absolutely right.
And the keyword is reaction.
And the reaction is fear.
When we're overwhelmed,
we become afraid.
And so the fear
mechanism is what
creates the defensive
protective responses that
begin to store what we're afraid
of, the sensations or emotions,
into our body.
>>SUE: So it's
producing chemistries,
and it's producing neurological
patterns, et cetera.
Is that what's happening here?
>>TRIPODI: Exactly.
Once you've survived
a memory, that's
different than healing it.
So we continue to remain in
survival mode, even years
after the original events occur.
And we also adapt to them,
so they become normal.
But our body, like you
say, almost like a circuit,
like a program that's just being
played over and over again,
is this reaction and defense
to something that was painful.
>>SUE: I think it's really
key to say here twice that you
can survive a memory.
It doesn't necessarily
mean that you've healed it.
If we got through,
it doesn't mean
that we've turned on a different
form of our body's function.
But rather, we could be
locked into this pattern
of defensiveness or fight
or flight or survival
mechanism that kicks in
during the middle of a trauma
or some unwanted experience.
Is this--
>>TRIPODI: Yes.
>>SUE: --tracking here?
>>TRIPODI: And if I
were to then define,
what is a healed memory, it's
one in which you're no longer
protecting yourself from it.
You're at peace with it.
There's no evidence
in your mind or body.
You're no longer in reaction.
You're not hardening.
You're not tensing.
You're not overwhelmed by it.
You can talk about it.
You could cry about it.
But you're not in
protection around it.
>>SUE: Yeah.
You've had this
firsthand experience
of the importance of going
back to a moment in time
and working it out
differently than how
you got through the first
time, with this accident
that you were sharing.
Can you just give us a
little detail about that
and show us how
that worked for you?
>>TRIPODI: Well, at age
21, I developed blood clots
in my right leg.
And blood clots embolized
and went to my heart
and then to my lung.
And it almost killed me.
Fortunately, I
survived, and I was told
it would never happen again.
Six months later, I had massive
blood clotting in my right leg.
So that really
sidelined me in my life.
I was taken out of
college, and I was in bed.
And I was given a prognosis
that was pretty sad.
I was going to have
degenerative effects in my leg
that would cause it to swell and
eventually lead to amputation.
So fast forward a few more
years later, at age 25, 26,
I get out of physical
therapy school,
and I discover myofascial
release and its ability
to help you access
memory in your body.
And I began to access
many memories in my body
but specifically, the one
related to a car accident
at age five.
I was walking across the
road to pick up a ball,
and a car driven by a drunk
driver going 40 miles an hour
hit me and threw my body
into a neighbor's driveway,
and I was dead.
My right leg was fractured.
I had broken bones in my ribs.
My mother heard the thud and
came out and resuscitated me
and brought me back to life.
And as a young kid,
you bounce back.
But what I hadn't
realized until age 26, 27,
when I started getting
body memory work done
to my body, specifically
this right leg,
I started to access these
memories of the accident.
The more I cleared
these memories
of the accident and a
lot of childhood emotions
that had been
suppressed, the swelling
in my leg from all
the blood clots
began to go down and
eventually disappear entirely.
And there was about a
15-year healing process
that led to a very
healthy right leg--
no degeneration, no amputation.
And for me, it helped me to
discover these innate healing
abilities that we all
have to transform our past
and get it out of our body and
actually regenerate ourselves.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
What would you say happens
when we start to clear
the effects of these memories?
What is it that's
happening there?
How is that unfolding?
How does healing
happen because you're
clearing a memory pattern?
>>TRIPODI: What happens is
these memories that we store
really are creating chaos
and stress in our body.
We're taking a painful
or stressful experience
and taking that,
encapsulating it in some way,
and storing it in our body.
So our body's reacting to it.
We've talked about
physical tensions.
But also, neurologically,
it creates stress.
And so when you
release body memory,
you're releasing stress.
So one of the
immediate effects is
that you find you become
more calm and more
peaceful with each
memory that's released.
Also, your body
becomes more relaxed.
The tension that was created
from these memories is gone.
And so now those
muscles, that tight neck
and the tight jaw
and the tight back
and those painful places in your
body aren't hurting anymore.
>>SUE: Why would you think it
necessary for a person to dive
in and clear these
things, these body
memories, if they're not
having particular symptoms
or patterns?
Is there a benefit
to that as well?
>>TRIPODI: Yeah.
You don't necessarily have
to have physical symptoms
or overt chronic pain to
be carrying body memory.
You can begin to look at
your life on other levels,
like emotionally and mentally.
So the idea is, are you happy?
Are you fulfilled?
Do you feel like you are being
guided by a sense of purpose
in this life?
Are you able to give
and receive love freely?
Do you feel like you have
a wise part of your nature
that is guiding
you in your life,
or are you constantly
relying on your intellect
and your logical memory
mind to figure things out?
>>SUE: That's huge.
>>TRIPODI: And so
body memory impacts
this on every level-- physical,
emotional, your heart,
your voice, your spirit.
And so releasing
body memory can begin
to help you reconnect
with and reaccess
these parts of your
nature and bring them
to a level of full potential.
>>SUE: Perfect.
What is necessary to
clear these patterns?
How do we do that?
>>TRIPODI: First, we have to
get conscious of what we're
unconscious of, because
when we store body memory,
part of the protective
mechanism is that we disconnect
our awareness.
We don't know it's there.
We feel pretty good.
You don't-- right?
But the challenge is, that helps
us to survive but not to heal,
as you mentioned earlier.
So first step is to reconnect
awareness to your body.
Feel into your body and
begin to get access.
What does it feel like in there?
Is it tense?
Is it stressful?
Is it scary?
Is it sad?
Is it happy?
How does it really feel to be
in your body, in your neck,
in your belly, in your heart?
What does it feel like?
And what happens
in this process,
as you begin to connect with
these fears that are protecting
you from events in your
past, now the next step
is to overcome the fear, meaning
let go of the protection.
Start to surrender to
what it is that you
were previously afraid of,
and maybe currently afraid of.
And as you do that, the
self-healing process
starts to take place.
And the very thing that you've
been protecting yourself from,
and specifically,
physical sensations
that are painful
and emotions, when
you begin to overcome
that fear, those energies
of those sensations and
emotions come up to the surface.
And they simply have one
agenda, to be accepted,
felt, and released.
And in that process,
your body may shake.
It could tremble.
It could twitch.
It can get hot or cold.
Certainly, all forms of emotion
can come to the surface.
And I often let people
know that if you
want to see a perfect model
of what it is to release body
memory, observe a two-year-old.
Look at these young
kids before they have
learned to be afraid to feel.
Watch how they fluidly express
their joy and their pain,
their fear and their sadness,
how it just rolls through them.
And what happens?
They feel it and they move on.
They go from being absolutely--
they skinned their knee.
They're in pain.
They're frightened.
They're sad.
They feel it, they release it.
They get up and go play again.
So this is what we're
up against as adults,
is revisiting these fears
around sensation and emotion
and talking ourself
into, maybe it's
going to be OK if I can
just let myself feel it.
Does it hurt?
Yes, it does.
What happens as the hurt
leaves your body is you
begin to transform the hurt.
You become more free of it,
and you become at peace.
And sometimes our
pains from our past
have lessons, little
insights, things to teach us.
And we don't get
access to those lessons
when it's still being
protected and defended.
>>SUE: I do similar
work to this.
And one of the things that
people initially will say
is that they don't
want to feel the pain.
I'm always encouraging
them to get in their body
and not be in
their head so much.
And people are like, well,
it doesn't feel good.
So can you offer
some suggestions
to our viewers that
might be thinking,
you know, I'm always trying
to get away from this pain
that I'm feeling.
And now you're telling
me I should drop in there
and feel it.
How?
>>TRIPODI: Well,
first I want to honor
the fact that we are afraid.
So that doesn't make you
broken or a failure or wrong.
It makes you human.
So we want to be able to start
to cultivate some compassion
for what it is to be human.
And it's not easy.
We have capacity, an
emotional capacity,
to feel things very deeply.
And that can be
overwhelming at times.
So the fear is very natural.
But what I want to
bring to the world
and help people to realize, as
it was brought to my attention
way back when, is that you
also have another potential.
And that potential
is transformation.
There's a part of
your nature that
is absolutely fearless, wise,
and loving and compassionate.
And we lose touch with
that part of our nature
when we get too obsessed
with what we're afraid of.
And we identify with our
fear as if that's me.
I'm a fearful person.
I would say, yes, you
are capable of fear.
But I want to let you know that
there is a part of your nature
that isn't afraid,
and it's ready to help
you transform everything
that ever happened
to you in your life and restore
you to a very vital, healthy,
and powerful place
so you can begin
leading your life from a place
of purpose and fulfillment
rather than in defense and fear.
>>SUE: Yes.
It's a very important time
in our culture for people
to identify that
they can transform
these painful, fearful
patterns like never before.
It's upon us at this time.
So what is science having to
say in support of this paradigm
that you're working with?
>>TRIPODI: Science is just
skyrocketing right now
on this topic.
And so I can hardly
keep up with it.
But I will say that the
field of biophysics, which
developed in the
1950s, has produced
a lot of real
scientific information
about how our biology
and energy are merged.
So prior to then, biology
was just studying the body,
and physics was just
studying energy.
When they merged
together, now we're
starting to measure
energy in the body.
There is the International
Fascial Conference,
and it's bringing together
people who are scientists,
as well as therapists,
psychologists,
and it's bringing to
light how specifically
the fascial system,
but how that interfaces
with the rest of the body,
and how this system conducts
energy, suppresses
energy to survive,
but also can get
reaccess to this energy
through the manipulation of that
tissue and bring about healing.
>>SUE: So I liken the
fascial patterning
as this cloth that
has threads running
in a variety of
different directions.
And if it gets torqued or
squeezed or stretched and held
in that way, it doesn't allow
the energy to run through that.
Is this kind of the perspective
that you're working with to--
>>TRIPODI: Absolutely.
So what we're really looking
at, when we look at our body
from an energetic perspective,
is that this entire body, all
its tissues, all its
cells, and the fluids
are combining to be a
conductor of energy.
It conducts many
different forms of energy.
And it also has the capacity
to store that information
in the form of energy
and reaccess it later.
So that's the memory component.
But literally, every
aspect of our anatomy
has conductive abilities,
storage abilities.
>>SUE: Everything is energy.
It's just moving and vibrating,
and it's all a communication
system.
This whole system
is, and I'm thrilled
to hear that you're
working with this directly.
Body Memory Recall-- can you
tell us about what that is,
specifically?
>>TRIPODI: Well, yes.
It's a form of the
body work that really
incorporates many techniques.
But essentially, it's
bringing touch to the body
and specifically to the places
in the body where it's gotten
hard or restricted or painful.
And it's inviting a change to
take place in those tissues.
So when you place your hands
on these areas of the body,
it not only stimulates the
physical tissues and fluids
to begin to soften
and release, but it
begins to touch and connect with
the person inside the tissues
and the fluids.
There's a person-- it's us.
It's our energy.
Our essence is actually embedded
within our tissues and fluids.
And it's that person
that's afraid,
and they're afraid
of things that
have happened in their past.
And they're storing that in
their fluids and tissues.
So the touch is really very
specific, in that it's gentle,
it's loving, it's connected.
It's not imposing or forceful.
And this helps a person
to feel safe, so safe
that they not only relax, but
they encounter those defense
systems that have been
active for many years.
And it helps them feel safe
enough to let them down.
And when that happens,
you get that transmission
of suppressed energy
and that release.
>>SUE: Healing presence
in that safety.
>>TRIPODI: Yes.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
So how did you go
about developing
the actual procedure?
You mentioned that
it's a combination
of a lot of different things.
But just tell us
about your process.
>>TRIPODI: Sure.
So I started out with my
physical therapy degree,
and then it was after
physical therapy school
that I started training
in weekend seminars
in myofascial release.
Myofascial release
taught by John Barnes
has been a significant
component to my work.
And then I trained
in other techniques,
like craniosacral therapy
and visceral manipulation.
But all of these techniques
had one thing in common.
They all interacted with the
body and the connective tissue
of the body.
But also, they touch
the body in a way
that help people to access
these protective responses
and release them and get that
body memory component out.
So after training in many
different techniques,
I just thought I would put them
all together into one approach.
My real intention was to
try to bring body memory
to as many people as possible
and the healing of body memory
to as many people as possible.
And I just think all of
those technical terms--
myofascial release,
craniosacral therapy--
they don't mean anything
to the layperson.
But body memory and body
memory transformation
is the universal term that
starts to relate to all people.
And so that's how it developed
over a period of time.
>>SUE: What do you
think the element is
that makes it so effective?
>>TRIPODI: The key
element is that A,
there's intention to help a
person release body memory.
Without that intention, look
how many modalities there
are out there.
If you ask all
those practitioners,
is your goal to help
release body memory?
They'd probably say no.
No.
So without the intent, most
of the time it doesn't happen.
So intention and
secondly, education.
If a person comes in
to receive body memory,
they've been educated about it.
And they've already prepared
themselves psychologically,
emotionally.
They're ready to
receive that healing.
So intention, education,
and the last thing is touch.
Your touch, the quality
of your touch-- again,
connecting with the
person in the body
before manipulating the body
because you can very easily
lose connection with the
person and get overly
involved with their
muscles and their bones
and their joints and their
fluids and forget there's
a person in there.
And that feels like
a physical workout,
a physical manipulation.
And it can feel
very good, but it
doesn't help us to get access
to those protective responses.
So the key is to come
out of protection.
What's going to
help you to do that?
To me, nothing
better than touch,
a loving touch, a safe touch,
but one that actually connects
with you inside, because
where we're afraid
is where we feel alone.
So when somebody connects
with that part of you that's
alone and afraid
energetically, it
has magical effects
of transformation.
>>SUE: And this works for
people that don't even
remember the trauma,
the original trauma?
Does it work for things
that would be accessing
a trauma that happened that
someone doesn't necessarily
have conscious memory of?
Maybe it was so long ago,
they've blocked it out,
or what have you.
In traumatic
circumstances, oftentimes,
people disconnect
completely, don't even
remember that something happened
when they were two or three
or four or five years old.
Have you had
experience in working
with people that are
having memories come up,
and they can't
connect it with what
the trauma was that caused it?
>>TRIPODI: Yes.
And a lot of people
are connected
with this present moment and the
symptoms of their body memory.
They have a physical symptom,
an emotional symptom,
a psychological symptom,
a stress of some kind.
They might have a
theoretical idea
that maybe this relates to
something from my past, but not
an exact knowing.
The good news is
is your body knows.
So we don't have to
figure everything out.
Your body is already
ready to take you
through that
transformational process.
It really just requires
you showing up and saying,
I'm ready.
I'm ready to begin that process
and go through recall, release.
And then integration
is where you
get insights, memories
of things that maybe you
had forgotten about.
So all of that comes, and
it's a very natural process.
>>SUE: What is unwinding?
>>TRIPODI: Unwinding
is a term that
describes the release step of
body memory transformation.
So what happens is the
body-- once the defenses
drop and the suppressed
energy moves through the body,
it moves the body.
So the body will
spontaneously move.
You're not moving it.
I'm not moving it.
It's just moving on its own.
As suppressed energy is
moving through the tissues,
moving through all your anatomy,
it's moving your anatomy.
So your body goes into
different positions.
It shakes.
Again, spontaneous emotions
come up and are expressed.
Sometimes people go into
positions of injury or trauma.
So that's called
positional memory.
But that whole dynamic
release response
is given a term unwinding.
It's like we get wound up, and
then when we heal, we unwind.
>>SUE: Excellent.
Again, for those that might not
really know what the fascia is,
it's like the
connect-- can you just
describe-- this
connective tissue that's
in between the organs in
the muscles and the glands,
and covering the
internal workings
and holding things
together in a sort of way.
Can you just drop into
a little definition
there to allow-- make
sure all of our viewers
get what we're talking about?
>>TRIPODI: Well,
you said it nicely.
I went through
physical therapy school
and still had no concept of
what connective tissue is.
So just so everybody
knows, this was not
standard information in health
classes or biology classes.
This is a system that got
overlooked and got put
on the sidelines as
not an important tissue
and is now being elevated
as maybe the most
important system in the body.
First of all, connective
tissue is a protein.
It's a chain of proteins
that has a beginning, which
is at the top of your
head, and an end, which
is at the bottom of your feet.
It's a continuous
network of proteins
that looks like white, stringy,
web-like tissue very randomly
organized in the body.
So it has connective functions
and that it connects everything
to everything--
blood vessels to
bones, bones to organs.
It connects cells to cells.
It connects everything.
But what's being
discovered now is
it not only has
connective functions,
but it has conductive
functions of energy.
And inside connective tissue,
the fibers are hollow,
and they have fluid inside.
Strolling Under the Skin
is a fascinating video,
the first ever that
begins to show in a living
body with a small
little telescope what
living fascia looks like.
So I recommend you look that
up, Strolling Under the Skin.
And you'll see the fluid
moving through these fibers
of connective tissue.
Now, when the fluid hardens,
when the fibers of connective
tissue bond together,
that's what's
creating what's
called body armor.
And that's where we feel hard
and tight and even painful
in our body.
>>SUE: Science is showing
us in energy medicine
that this is actually a
form of communication that's
running through the
body that operates
as effectively-- in fact, more
instantaneously than the nerve
impulse.
So it's actually carrying
communication as well.
So if that
communication is getting
thwarted because of
these stored memories,
it keeps us from having a sense
of well-being that is inherent.
This shielding keeps us from
knowing who we really are
and that we're OK and
that trauma has passed.
>>TRIPODI: You're right.
It's not just helping
us communicate
with our outer environment but
also our inner environment.
>>SUE: Yes.
The other--
>>TRIPODI: And if
I could step this
into another level of
anatomy that isn't often
standard anatomy in
our school system
is our energetic anatomy.
We have a light body,
an energy body that
surrounds the physical body.
And what's being
discovered scientifically
is this light body
is being channeled
into the physical body,
into the cells of our body,
pumped into it.
And then the connective
tissue system, specifically,
is converting the light
into sound and electricity
and magnetic waves.
And it's converting it
into forms of energy
that our nervous system and the
fluids and circulatory system
and organs can work with.
So it's interfacing our light
body with our physical body.
So when it gets all
gummed up and hardened,
it's depriving us access
and the experience
of this part of our
nature, which is actually
quite powerful and beautiful.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Now you're singing my song.
This is what I absolutely
love, is that there are not
two separate worlds of energy
and then our physicality,
that there's this bridge.
And science is starting to
study the bridge between,
and this is exactly
what you're speaking of.
Much more to come.
So we have a video
here of Jonathan
facilitating and unwinding.
Let's take a look and have
Jonathan talk us through it
as we're watching.
>>TRIPODI: So as you
can see, the first step
is to connect with the
person in the body.
So as a practitioner, you learn
to touch people and connect
with that person first.
And you can see the level
of focus and concentration
in both myself and my wife
Angie as we work with Peter here
on the table.
Now, as Peter begins to
allow himself to receive
that connection, you
see his body starts
to come out of protect mode, and
his body now starts to unwind.
It transmits in
little ways, and later
in big ways, some of
the suppressed energies
and stresses that he has held.
And that produces movement.
And as practitioners,
you learn how
to feel a person
wanting to unwind
and how to use your hands
to support that unwinding.
When a person feels
supported to unwind,
it helps them to unwind
deeper and more fully.
Sometimes people need to push
and exert themselves and push
against your hands as a way of
getting suppressed energy out.
>>SUE: It's kind of a
rebirthing kind of thing
that's happening in certain
ways, moving energy into this.
>>TRIPODI: Yeah.
If you appreciate that
all of this tension
is becoming like a prison,
a straitjacket, a shell,
that we're internally
feeling very compromised by
and we want out,
but we're afraid.
And so once we overcome
the fear of it,
you see exactly what you saw,
which is a person-- almost
like a snake shedding its skin.
It's writhing its way out of
its hardness and tensions.
And energies are
just moving out.
And the end result is you
feel like you've been birthed.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Oh, here I am.
>>TRIPODI: You feel lighter
and fresh and alive again.
Yeah, here I am.
>>SUE: Now, once someone has
this experience with you,
can they continue to
do this on their own?
Once they recognize that,
oh, here's what I have to do,
I have to let go in this way
and allow this thing to happen,
they can continue
it on their own?
>>TRIPODI: That's
the takeaway, is
that when you
remember how to let
go, because it is a remembering,
once you remember how
to let go, that's the
positive body memory,
is you go, oh, yeah.
This actually feels good.
This is really OK.
I can trust this process.
Then when you're in
your everyday life
and you have stresses
into your life,
you can begin to become
aware of the habit
to survive and suppress
and just switch gears.
And you can self-unwind at home.
I usually tell people to
do it in a quiet place,
private place, on the
floor with pillows,
so that their body is free to
move and stretch and release
and make sounds.
Cry if you need to,
whatever needs to happen,
that you're uninhibited
in the process.
Light a candle.
Put some music on.
>>SUE: Yeah.
What is it that
you would suggest
that someone do to
be able to cultivate
their own ability to unwind?
Are there ways
that they can live?
Are there lifestyle things?
Are there things they
can pay attention
to that are going to enhance
their ability to sense
and perceive, oh, this
needs to be happening,
and my body really wants
to just untangle or unwind
in this area?
Is there anything that
you can suggest for people
to begin to cultivate
their ability to do this?
>>TRIPODI: Yes.
I would say there's
a few things.
First, consider the
opposite of suppression.
The opposite is expression.
So just getting mindful
of all of your tendencies
throughout the day to suppress
movement, to suppress emotion,
to suppress sound, or suppress
communication or words,
and simply shift.
I'm going to express.
I'm going to let my
body move in this way.
I'm going to let some sound out.
I'm going to let myself feel
and express what I'm feeling,
maybe not in the
moment it's happening
if it feels inappropriate,
but in a private place.
>>SUE: In some way.
>>TRIPODI: That's a good start.
The other is to begin
educating yourself more
about this phenomenon.
And I recommend my book,
Freedom from Body Memory,
only because it
lays the foundation,
and we need to
understand the experience
before we feel necessarily safe
in entering the experience.
Lastly, there's no substitute
for being in a class or retreat
environment or even having
the BMR body work directly.
I wouldn't be where I'm
at today in this process
if I didn't have help.
We need help.
>>SUE: Get over the hump
when you get started.
>>TRIPODI: We need
to get over the hump.
So a three-day
retreat or a class
will help jump start you into
this experience that's totally
natural but ultimately foreign.
And we just need to remember.
And then we can
take off on our own.
There's also physical stretching
you can do with balls and foam
rollers and other forms
of yoga that can take you
into an unwinding state if you
have remembered how to unwind.
Everyday stretching can
turn into an unwinding
if you have cultivated
that ability.
>>SUE: Right.
If you can recognize that
subtle threshold, where
it goes from being
intentional about something
and then being
available to something
that's trying to happen
unconsciously through the body.
Beautiful.
So what are some of
the most dramatic--
the outcomes that
you've witnessed,
the healings, the processes,
the transformations
that have occurred with BMR?
I'm putting you on the spot now.
Just give us some examples.
>>TRIPODI: The
video that we just
watched, there was
a lady who said
she had over 35 broken bones
in her body in a car accident.
And she came to see
me using a cane.
She was also on antidepressants
and many medications
to help cope with the
amount of pain in her body.
She had a lot of hardware
to put her back together.
She had gone through a divorce.
And so she was also--
not only had lost her--
had that kind of loss
in a relationship,
but then she had this car
accident on top of it.
She was a very active, athletic
person, and now lost her body.
So it was a pretty sad
state, but somehow she
found her way to me
for body memory work,
hoping that it could help.
And within a few sessions, her
body unwound, the car accident.
It unwound the grief and
heartache from her divorce.
And it helped her to reconnect
with her original essence,
her true nature.
And she started to find
her courage, her love,
her inspiration, and her spirit.
And she left my clinic
after a few sessions
not using a cane and
off her medications.
And it's been a few
years since then,
but she is thriving in her life.
I still talk with
her occasionally.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Yeah.
This is what makes-- it
makes it all matter, when
things like this happen.
>>TRIPODI: I would say one of
the other dramatic experiences
is watching a baby
unwind, because babies you
can't have a conversation with.
And some babies have been
born, and they're colicky,
and they're crying, or they seem
to be under a lot of stress.
And the mother is
really concerned
and they don't know what to do.
Babies unwind instantly.
They just haven't
learned not to.
And they somehow just
need the lightest support.
So just the gentlest
of touch to their body.
And their little bodies will
writhe and go into positions,
and they scream and they cry
and they get red and they shake.
And then within minutes--
>>SUE: It's all gone.
>>TRIPODI: --their body
just melts on the table.
>>SUE: It's all OK.
>>TRIPODI: They look up at mom.
They go to the breast.
They don't have all of that.
All their anxiety
issues are gone.
It's also my experience that we
hold memory from our ancestors.
So sometimes certain
pains and stresses
are handed down
through our lineage,
and we just inherit them.
And these little babies
have the opportunity
when they're treated to unwind
a lot of these programmings that
are stress and survival and
pain related programming,
to get it out of their system.
So one of my real desires
is to bring this work
to doulas and midwives so we can
help mothers and children clear
trauma so they don't have to
live it out for so many years.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
As if our parents hand us
the baton and say, here.
I did what I could do.
Good luck.
>>TRIPODI: Exactly.
>>SUE: You take it from here.
That's all I can handle.
Yeah.
That's beautiful.
So two of Jonathan's clients
were so affected by BMR,
they're in the process of
producing a documentary
about it.
Here's a trailer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> BMR was the first thing that
really got me out of my head.
>> Within our hearts
is unconditional love.
>> BMR has made me a
lot more confident.
>> What BMR means
to me is freedom.
>>TRIPODI: One of the
most amazing things
that comes out of the Body
Memory Recall healing process
is how much fear
is in our bodies.
>> It was the first time I
ever felt that nurturing,
loving touch.
And it was unconditional
love that I felt,
and it gave me hope.
>> And what's
beautiful about BMR is,
through very loving and
sensitive touch to the body,
you get to discover where
fear is residing in your body,
where you're still afraid.
And that touch helps to
invite us to come out of fear.
And as we come out of fear,
we not only release the things
that we're afraid
of in the past,
but we start to open up
into the present moment
and become fearless
in the present moment.
>> So powerful and so open
to my body and to myself.
>>TRIPODI: In the release phase,
it's a letting go of control.
It's allowing of
suppressed energy
to transmit through your body.
>> Just exploding
heart full of love,
and I felt like I
was truly myself,
that person that
I was so long ago.
>> One of the things that occurs
with BMR treatments is you stop
living in ways that
insults your soul.
>> It just clicked and changed
the way I started thinking
about life.
>> It's what love feels like.
>>TRIPODI: So in BMR,
it's like bringing touch,
and it's inviting people
to enter this process
to really restore
wholeness to themselves.
>> I had my first release,
and I was just totally amazed.
And I was hooked.
>> That first BMR treatment,
it was all so much grief around
having to be somebody for
30-plus years that wasn't me.
>> It was the most
amazing experience.
Whether you're skeptical or
not, you get on the table,
you're going to feel expansive.
You're going to feel free.
>>TRIPODI: You enter
the present moment,
where anything is possible.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SUE: We're designed for it.
Another client whose life
has been changed by BMR
is Jonathan's wife, Angie,
who's joining us here today.
Angie, welcome.
>>ANGIE: Thank you.
>>SUE: Welcome, welcome.
>>ANGIE: Pardon
me, that watching
that video is emotional.
It's still like-- of
course, it's so powerful.
This has really
transformed my life.
>>SUE: Yes.
There is nothing like
coming home to yourself,
and that is amazing.
So how did that happen for you?
>>ANGIE: Well, I found a
student of Jonathan's had
learned how to do BMR.
He was an acupuncturist,
and a therapist
had recommended
that I go see him.
And so I showed up not
really knowing what BMR was
all about but ready to say yes.
I was diagnosed with
fibromyalgia when I was 19.
So at that point, I'd had
it for about 12 years.
And I had tried
everything that there
was to try to make this pain
better, and to no avail.
So I participated
in my first session,
and I naturally unwound.
It was completely
unbelievable to me.
So I started going about twice
a week for about three months.
And after that
time, I was healed.
I didn't have any more pain.
>>SUE: And what was your
experience inside of that?
This is just fantastic.
What happened along the way?
>>ANGIE: Well, I got
access to a lot of things
that I experienced
in my childhood
that I had not allowed
myself to feel or express
or even acknowledge,
where it had happened,
as you were asking before, about
those things that you block out
or those things that you might
be afraid of even feeling
or remembering.
Those things did come
up in my sessions,
but that was the source
of what was actually
causing my chronic pain,
was how many times I
was not only in fight or flight
but the freeze response, which
is that deer in the
headlights, I am a little kid
and I have no
choice in the matter
and I have nowhere to go.
That started to really store
up and accumulate in my body.
So when I did those
sessions, I was
able to access those memories
and then feel them and release
them.
And then my body was free of
the pain and all of the things
that were associated with it.
>>SUE: And you got more
out of the situation, too.
[LAUGHTER]
>>ANGIE: Yeah.
>>SUE: Not just
relief, but you know--
>>ANGIE: Yes.
>>SUE: You got a life
partner out of it.
>>TRIPODI: Your life partner
comes in mysterious ways.
>>SUE: Yes, right, in many ways.
We find our destiny.
Are you training others
to do this work as well?
>>TRIPODI: I have four
levels of training,
and then I have additional
unwinding courses
if people want to pursue it.
I have a certification program.
And yeah.
>>SUE: How can people
learn more about that?
>>TRIPODI: My website,
freedomfrombodymemory.com
and my book, Freedom
from Body Memory,
which is available on Amazon.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
And what do you feel is the most
important piece about this work
for the world?
>>TRIPODI: As we
begin to operate
more from our true nature
and less from our suffering,
the world changes and it
becomes a better place.
I think a lot of what this
world is suffering from
is billions and
billions of people
who are suffering, and
holding their suffering,
and recycling their
suffering, and not knowing
what to do about it, and
feeling helpless around that.
And there's many
techniques, but unwinding,
the one that's built
into you already,
the part of you that's ready--
any moment you are ready to
allow it to work through you,
is ready to transform you.
And that's exciting.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Thank you both for being
here, and thank you
so much, Jonathan, for sharing
your profound insights with us.
The world is ready to
wake up and to learn
how to heal themselves.
And this is a wonderful modality
for them to get a great start.
Thank you for being here.
>>TRIPODI: Thank you.
>>ANGIE: Thank you.
>>SUE: We've often
discussed on this program
how important it is
to get to the root
cause of health issues.
Jonathan Tripodi's Body Memory
Recall is an invaluable tool,
not only to identify the
source of our problems,
but to release on
a cellular level
that which is keeping
us from true well-being.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
Thank you for joining
us on Healing Matrix.
[MUSIC PLAYING]